Chapter-6
Tree Data Structure
We read the linear data structures like an array, linked list,
stack and queue in which all the elements are arranged in a
sequential manner. The different data structures are used for
different kinds of data.
Some factors are considered for choosing the data
structure:
 What type of data needs to be stored?: It might be a
possibility that a certain data structure can be the best fit
for some kind of data.
 Cost of operations: If we want to minimize the cost for
the operations for the most frequently performed
operations. For example, we have a simple list on which
we have to perform the search operation; then, we can
create an array in which elements are stored in sorted
order to perform the binary search. The binary search
works very fast for the simple list as it divides the search
space into half.
 Memory usage: Sometimes, we want a data structure
that utilizes less memory.
A tree is also one of the data structures that represent
hierarchical data. Suppose we want to show the employees
and their positions in the hierarchical form then it can be
represented as shown below:

the above tree shows the organization hierarchy of some company.
In the above structure, john is the CEO of the company, and John has
two direct reports named as Steve and Rohan. Steve has three direct
reports named Lee, Bob, Ella where Steve is a manager. Bob has two
direct reports named Sal and Emma. Emma has two direct reports
named Tom and Raj. Tom has one direct report named Bill. This
particular logical structure is known as a Tree. Its structure is similar
to the real tree, so it is named a Tree. In this structure, the root is at
the top, and its branches are moving in a downward direction.
Therefore, we can say that the Tree data structure is an efficient way
of storing the data in a hierarchical way.
Let&#39;s understand some key points of the Tree data structure.
 A tree data structure is defined as a collection of objects or
entities known as nodes that are linked together to represent
or simulate hierarchy.

 A tree data structure is a non-linear data structure because it
does not store in a sequential manner. It is a hierarchical
structure as elements in a Tree are arranged in multiple levels.
 In the Tree data structure, the topmost node is known as a root
node. Each node contains some data, and data can be of any
type. In the above tree structure, the node contains the name
of the employee, so the type of data would be a string.
 Each node contains some data and the link or reference of
other nodes that can be called children.
Some basic terms used in Tree data structure.
Let&#39;s consider the tree structure, which is shown below:

n the above structure, each node is labeled with some number. Each
arrow shown in the above figure is known as a link between the two
nodes.
 Root: The root node is the topmost node in the tree hierarchy.
In other words, the root node is the one that doesn&#39;t have any
parent. In the above structure, node numbered 1 is the root
node of the tree. If a node is directly linked to some other
node, it would be called a parent-child relationship.
 Child node: If the node is a descendant of any node, then the
node is known as a child node.
 Parent: If the node contains any sub-node, then that node is
said to be the parent of that sub-node.
 Sibling: The nodes that have the same parent are known as
siblings.
 Leaf Node:- The node of the tree, which doesn&#39;t have any child
node, is called a leaf node. A leaf node is the bottom-most
node of the tree. There can be any number of leaf nodes
present in a general tree. Leaf nodes can also be called external
nodes.
 Internal nodes: A node has atleast one child node known as an
internal
 Ancestor node:- An ancestor of a node is any predecessor node
on a path from the root to that node. The root node doesn&#39;t
have any ancestors. In the tree shown in the above image,
nodes 1, 2, and 5 are the ancestors of node 10.

 Descendant: The immediate successor of the given node is
known as a descendant of a node. In the above figure, 10 is the
descendant of node 5.
Properties of Tree data structure
 Recursive data structure: The tree is also known as a recursive
data structure. A tree can be defined as recursively because
the distinguished node in a tree data structure is known as a
root node. The root node of the tree contains a link to all the
roots of its subtrees. The left subtree is shown in the yellow
color in the below figure, and the right subtree is shown in the
red color. The left subtree can be further split into subtrees
shown in three different colors. Recursion means reducing
something in a self-similar manner. So, this recursive property
of the tree data structure is implemented in various
applications.

 Number of edges: If there are n nodes, then there would n-1
edges. Each arrow in the structure represents the link or path. Each

node, except the root node, will have atleast one incoming link
known as an edge. There would be one link for the parent-child
relationship.
 Depth of node x: The depth of node x can be defined as the length
of the path from the root to the node x. One edge contributes one-
unit length in the path. So, the depth of node x can also be defined
as the number of edges between the root node and the node x. The
root node has 0 depth.
 Height of node x: The height of node x can be defined as the
longest path from the node x to the leaf node.
Based on the properties of the Tree data structure, trees are
classified into various categories.

Implementation of Tree
The tree data structure can be created by creating the nodes
dynamically with the help of the pointers. The tree in the memory
can be represented as shown below:

1. struct node  
2. {  
3.   int data;  
4. struct node *left;  
5. struct node *right;   
6. }  
The above structure can only be defined for the binary trees because
the binary tree can have utmost two children, and generic trees can
have more than two children. The structure of the node for generic
trees would be different as compared to the binary tree.
Applications of trees
The following are the applications of trees:
 Storing naturally hierarchical data: Trees are used to store the
data in the hierarchical structure. For example, the file system.
The file system stored on the disc drive, the file and folder are
in the form of the naturally hierarchical data and stored in the
form of trees.

 Organize data: It is used to organize data for efficient insertion,
deletion and searching. For example, a binary tree has a logN
time for searching an element.
 Trie: It is a special kind of tree that is used to store the
dictionary. It is a fast and efficient way for dynamic spell
checking.
 Heap: It is also a tree data structure implemented using arrays.
It is used to implement priority queues.
 B-Tree and B+Tree: B-Tree and B+Tree are the tree data
structures used to implement indexing in databases.
 Routing table: The tree data structure is also used to store the
data in routing tables in the routers.
types of Tree data structure
The following are the types of a tree data structure:
 General tree: The general tree is one of the types of tree data
structure. In the general tree, a node can have either 0 or
maximum n number of nodes. There is no restriction imposed
on the degree of the node (the number of nodes that a node
can contain). The topmost node in a general tree is known as a
root node. The children of the parent node are known as
subtrees.

There can be n number of subtrees in a general tree. In the general
tree, the subtrees are unordered as the nodes in the subtree cannot
be ordered.
Every non-empty tree has a downward edge, and these edges are
connected to the nodes known as child nodes. The root node is
labeled with level 0. The nodes that have the same parent are known
as siblings.

Esha,Beena,Deepa,Gilda,Amit,Geeta,Chetan
a)Insert Esha

b)Insert Beena

(c) Insert Deepa
Esha

Esha

Beenaa

Esha

Beenaa Glida

Binary Search tree: Binary search tree is a non-linear data structure
in which one node is connected to n number of nodes. It is a node-
based data structure. A node can be represented in a binary search
tree with three fields, i.e., data part, left-child, and right-child. A
node can be connected to the utmost two child nodes in a binary
search tree, so the node contains two pointers (left child and right
child pointer).
Every node in the left subtree must contain a value less than the
value of the root node, and the value of each node in the right
subtree must be bigger than the value of the root node.
Deepa Amit

Geeta

Chetan

AVL TREE (HEIGHT BALANCE TREE)

AVL Tree is invented by GM Adelson - Velsky and EM Landis in
1962. The tree is named AVL in honour of its inventors.
AVL Tree can be defined as height balanced binary search tree in
which each node is associated with a balance factor which is
calculated by subtracting the height of its right sub-tree from that
of its left sub-tree.
Tree is said to be balanced if balance factor of each node is in
between -1 to 1, otherwise, the tree will be unbalanced and need
to be balanced.
Balance Factor (k) = height (left(k)) - height (right(k))
If balance factor of any node is 1, it means that the left sub-tree is
one level higher than the right sub-tree.
If balance factor of any node is 0, it means that the left sub-tree
and right sub-tree contain equal height.
If balance factor of any node is -1, it means that the left sub-tree is
one level lower than the right sub-tree.
An AVL tree is given in the following figure. We can see that,
balance factor associated with each node is in between -1 and +1.
Therefore, it is an example of AVL tree.

AVL Rotations
We perform rotation in AVL tree only in case if Balance Factor is
other than -1, 0, and 1. There are basically four types of rotations
which are as follows:
1. L L rotation: Inserted node is in the left subtree of left subtree
of A
2. R R rotation : Inserted node is in the right subtree of right
subtree of A
3. L R rotation : Inserted node is in the right subtree of left
subtree of A

4. R L rotation : Inserted node is in the left subtree of right
subtree of A
Where node A is the node whose balance Factor is other than -1, 0,
1.
The first two rotations LL and RR are single rotations and the next
two rotations LR and RL are double rotations. For a tree to be
unbalanced, minimum height must be at least 2, Let us understand
each rotation
1. RR Rotation
When BST becomes unbalanced, due to a node is inserted into the
right subtree of the right subtree of A, then we perform RR
rotation, RR rotation
is an anticlockwise rotation, which is applied on the edge below a
node having balance factor -2

In above example, node A has balance factor -2 because a node C is
inserted in the right subtree of A right subtree. We perform the RR
rotation on the edge below A.
2. LL Rotation

When BST becomes unbalanced, due to a node is inserted into the
left subtree of the left subtree of C, then we perform LL rotation, LL
rotation
is clockwise rotation, which is applied on the edge below a node
having balance factor 2.

In above example, node C has balance factor 2 because a node A is
inserted in the left subtree of C left subtree. We perform the LL
rotation on the edge below A.
3. LR Rotation
Double rotations are bit tougher than single rotation which has
already explained above. LR rotation = RR rotation + LL rotation,
i.e., first RR rotation is performed on subtree and then LL rotation is
performed on full tree, by full tree we mean the first node from the
path of inserted node whose balance factor is other than -1, 0, or 1.

Let us understand each and every step very clearly:

4. RL Rotation
As already discussed, that double rotations are bit tougher than
single rotation which has already explained above. R L rotation
= LL rotation + RR rotation, i.e., first LL rotation is performed on
subtree and then RR rotation is performed on full tree, by full tree
we mean the first node fro m the path of inserted node whose
balance factor is other than -1, 0, or 1.

Q: Construct an AVL tree having the following elements

H, I, J, B, A, E, C, F, D, G, K, L